---
number: '1'
layout: 'adi_humanintelligence'
title: 'Puppet, operations, Open Source, life and everything'
date: '20241002'
host: Alessandro Franceschi
youtube: OiB17BLDNs8
guest: Luke Kanies
tags:
  - Puppet
  - DevOps 
  - Automation
  - Open Source
  - IT Management
  - Software Development
  - Ruby
  - System Management
summary: The evolution and impact of a significant DevOps tool, exploring its founder's experiences, challenges, and visions for the future of automation in tech.
quotes:
  - "I wanted to train the market to care about how automated their systems were."
  - "The fact that one tool can do all that, at least with some success, I think is pretty great."
  - "I wish Puppet was more like that, smaller and more self-contained."
  - "I think there are interesting ways to balance the need for commercial support and community governance."

---
This first episode of Abnormal DevOps Iterations discusses various aspects of DevOps, particularly focusing on the tool Puppet and its evolution.
The guest, Luke Kanies, the founder of Puppet, shares insights about the inception of Puppet and its significance in managing systems.
He highlights the goal of making Puppet universally usable, unlike existing tools at the time, and reflects on both the best and worst technical decisions made during Puppet's development, such as the use of Ruby instead of Python and some internal architectural choices.

Luke also talks about his personal journey, dealing with long COVID, and his career shift after stepping away from the day-to-day operations of Puppet.

He reflects on the broader IT landscape, the challenges of building automation tools, and the complexity of managing different operating systems.
Despite the success of Puppet, he shares lessons learned, such as the importance of separating certain components into independent products.

The conversation explores the future of automation tools and the IT industry, with Luke emphasizing the need for more standalone, smaller tools and better visibility into system automation.

He also critiques the current state of open-source governance and the lack of a coherent strategy for sustaining innovation in both commercial and community-driven projects.
