---
number: '16'
layout: 'adi_humanintelligence'
title:  MGMT, Reactive Automation, and the Future of Infrastructures
date: '20250122'
host: Alessandro Franceschi
youtube: '8wwQCuK5ZcA'
guest: James Shubin
tags:
  - MGMT
  - DevOps
  - Automation
  - ReactiveAutomation
  - Infrastructure
  - OpenSource
  - ConfigManagement
---
Welcome to this in-depth chat with James Shubin, creator of MGMT, as we explore next-generation DevOps and infrastructure automation. Discover how MGMT stands out from traditional configuration management tools like Puppet, Ansible, or Terraform, thanks to its unique reactive automation approach. James explains how modeling time, scaling, and responding to instant infrastructure changes can future-proof your environment—whether you’re running distributed systems on-premises or in the cloud.

In this conversation, we also dive into the complexities of open source software, discussing sustainability, funding challenges, and the evolving role of community support. James shares his honest thoughts on how large corporations shape technology trends, why Kubernetes may not always be the ultimate answer, and how MGMT aims to offer a simpler, more efficient path to continuous configuration. We wrap up by tackling the buzz around AI, touching on how machine learning models and big tech influence the DevOps landscape.

Whether you’re a DevOps engineer, system administrator, or simply curious about the future of IT infrastructure, this episode is packed with insights. Tune in to learn more about James’s mission to democratize automation, reduce complexity, and build next-level tooling for the industry. Stay until the end for conference highlights, community updates, and a glimpse into how you can get involved.